docs: add `Using gnokey` tutorial (#2226)
gnolang/gno: docs/getting-started/using-gnokey.md

---
id: using-gnokey
---

# Using `gnokey`

## Overview
In this tutorial, you will learn how to use the `gnokey` binary to interact with
a Gno.land chain. You will learn how to create state-changing calls, run readonly

> queries without using gas, as well as create, sign, and broadcast airgapped

Reviewer: What does "airgapped" mean here?

Author: Airgap means having a split in the transaction creation &singing and the broadcasting. I've linked the [wiki page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Air_gap_(networking)) to it so it can give a bit more context; although it is a well known term in Web3 imho

Author: [`dec53e7` (#2226)](https://github.com/gnolang/gno/pull/2226/commits/dec53e71e9fa90601bfc6b57721b4ca00f080631)

transactions for full security.

## Prerequisites

> - **`gno`, `gnokey`, and `gnodev` installed.** Reference the

Reviewer: Formatting is off

Author: I've replaced these sections with only requiring `gnokey`. Please check out the files.

  [Local Setup](local-setup/installation.md#2-installing-the-required-tools-) guide for steps
- **A Gno.land keypair set up.** Reference the
  [Working with Key Pairs](local-setup/working-with-key-pairs.md) guide for steps

## Interacting with a Gno.land chain

`gnokey` allows you to interact with any Gno.land network, such as the
[Portal Loop](../concepts/portal-loop.md) testnet.

There are multiple ways anyone can interact with the chain:
- Transactions - state-changing calls which use gas
- ABCI queries - read-only calls which do not use gas

Both transactions and ABCI queries can be used via `gnokey`'s subcommands,
`maketx` and `query`.

## State-changing calls (transactions)

In Gno, there are four types of messages that can change on-chain state:

> - `AddPackage` - adds new code to the chain

Author: In this case, I was referring to the in-code types: `MsgAddPackage`, `MsgSend`, `MsgCall`, `MsgRun`.

- `Call` - calls a specific path and function on the chain
- `Send` - sends coins from one address to another

> - `Run` - executes a Gno script against on-chain code

Reviewer: What does "against on-chain code" mean?

Author: The `MsgRun` work by creating a temporary realm that executes code, which can import and use other on-chain code. This seems understandable by me - do you have any other suggestions on how to phrase this?

A Gno.land transaction contains two main things:
- A base configuration where variables such as `gas-fee`, `gas-wanted`, and others
  are defined

> - A list of messages to execute on the chain

Reviewer: Please drop this section, it's not only incorrect but useless

Author: I don't think it's useless; this is the only place currently that actually mentions that gno.land supports multi-msg transactions. How is it incorrect?

Currently, `gnokey` supports single-message transactions, while multiple-message
transactions can be created in Go programs, supported by the
[gnoclient](../reference/gnoclient/gnoclient.md) package.

We will need some testnet GNOTs for each state-changing call. Visit the [Faucet
Hub](https://faucet.gno.land) to get GNOTs for the currently live Gno testnets.

Let's delve deeper into each of these messages.

> ### `AddPackage`

Reviewer 2: This is a lot of content for one page.  How about creating a parent page that has all the content above and having individual pages for each of the `gnokey` use cases that we want to highlight ?

Author: I would propose the following structure.

Have the content in this PR replace the current `gno-tooling/gnokey.md` file by having the intro section be an index page, and each subsection, ie Calls, Queries, Airgapped TXs be its own page. In this case, I would simplify the Working with Key Pairs tutorial in the getting started section to simply allow people to set up a key pair, and add a page under the new `gnokey` section in `gno-tooling` that would cover everything keypair-related. WDYT?

Reviewer: Heavy +1 @deelawn

In case you want to upload new code to the chain, you can use the `AddPackage`
message type. You can send an `AddPackage` transaction with `gnokey` using the
following command:

```bash
gnokey maketx addpkg
```

To understand how to use this subcommand better, let's write a simple "Hello world"
[pure package](../concepts/packages.md). First, let's create a folder which will
store our example code.

```bash
└── example/
```

Then, let's create a `hello_world.gno` file under the `p/` folder:

```bash
cd example
mkdir p/ && cd p

> touch hello_world.gno

Author: To be honest, I'm not really sure with all of the discussions on it being optional. These commands work without a `gno.mod` file, and the tutorial's main focus isn't `gno.mod`, but `gnokey`. I would leave `gno.mod` for it's own page/tutorial

```

Now, we should have the following folder structure:

```bash
└── example/
│   └── p/
│       └── hello_world.gno
```

In the `hello_world.gno` file, add the following code:

```go
package hello_world

func Hello() string {
  return "Hello, world!"
}
```

We are now ready to upload this package to the chain. To do this, we must set the
correct flags for the `addpkg` subcommand.

The `addpkg` subcommmand uses the following flags and arguments:
- `-pkgpath` - on-chain path where your code will be uploaded to
- `-pkgdir` - local path where your is located
- `-broadcast` - enables broadcasting the transaction to the chain
- `-send` - a deposit amount of GNOT to send along with the transaction
- `-gas-wanted` - the upper limit for units of gas for the execution of the
  transaction
- `-gas-fee` - amount of GNOTs to pay per gas unit

> - `-chain-id` - id of the chain to connect to

Reviewer: We don't use this chain id for connecting

Author: Updated it to be more accurate: [78187b0](https://github.com/gnolang/gno/pull/2226/commits/78187b0629a86f6fae716e358191202a5f709efa)

-pkgpath "gno.land/p/<your_namespace>/hello_world" \
-pkgdir "." \
-send "" \
-gas-fee 10000000ugnot \
-gas-wanted 8000000 \
-broadcast \
-chainid dev \
-remote "127.0.0.1:26657" \
```

Once we have added a desired namespace to upload the package to, we can specify
a keypair name to use to execute the transaction:

```bash
gnokey maketx addpkg \                                                                                                                                                                                          
-pkgpath "gno.land/p/leon/hello_world" \
-pkgdir "." \
-send "" \
-gas-fee 10000000ugnot \
-gas-wanted 200000 \
-broadcast \
-chainid dev \
-remote "127.0.0.1:26657" \
mykey
```

If the transaction was successful, you will get the following output from `gnokey`:

```
OK!
GAS WANTED: 200000
GAS USED:   117564
HEIGHT:     3990
EVENTS:     []
```

Let's analyze the output, which is standard for any `gnokey` transaction:
- `GAS WANTED: 200000` - the original amount of gas specified for the transaction
- `GAS USED:   117564` - the gas used to execute the transaction
- `HEIGHT:     3990` - the block number at which the transaction was executed at

> - `EVENTS:     []` - events emitted by the transaction, in this case, none

Reviewer: Why not simply write an example that will have events?

Congratulations! You have just uploaded a pure package to your local chain.
If you wish to upload the package to a remote testnet, make sure to switch out
the `-chainid` & `-remote` values for the ones matching your desired testnet.
Find a list of all networks in the [Network Configuration](../reference/network-config.md)
section.

### `Call`

> The `Call` message type is used to call any exported function on the chain.

Reviewer: Consider rephrasing this as `any exported Realm function...`

Author: Rephrased it: [d1bb488](https://github.com/gnolang/gno/pull/2226/commits/d1bb488c3719ebd409e2da08181761161ae10765)

You can send a `Call` transaction with `gnokey` using the following command:

```bash
gnokey maketx call
```

:::info `Call` uses gas

Using `Call` to call an exported function will use up gas, even if the function
does not modify on-chain state. If you are calling such a function, you can use
the [`query` functionality](#query) for a read-only call which does not use gas.

:::

For this example, we will call the `wugnot` realm, which wraps GNOTs to a
GRC20-compatible token called `wugnot`. We can find this realm deployed on the

> [Portal Loop](../concepts/portal-loop.md) testnet, under the `gno.land/r/demo/wugnot`.

Reviewer: What do you think about writing and deploying a single Realm that you can use to demonstrate all of the functionalities in this tutorial?

Author: I think it's nice to use the tutorial to also show the reader some of the realms that they can actually use on the blockchain, so I would like to keep it this way

We will wrap `1000ugnot` into the equivalent in `wugnot`. To do this, we can call
the `Deposit()` function found in the `wugnot` realm. As previously, we will
configure the `maketx call` subcommand:

```bash
gnokey maketx call \
-pkgpath "gno.land/r/demo/wugnot" \
-func "Deposit" \
-send "1000ugnot" \
-gas-fee 10000000ugnot \
-gas-wanted 2000000 \
-broadcast \
-chainid portal-loop \
-remote "https://rpc.gno.land:443"" \

> demyv

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
mykey
```

```

In this command, we have specified three main things:
- The path where the realm lives on-chain with the `-pkgpath` flag
- The function that we want to call on the realm with the `-func` flag

> - The amount of `ugnot` we want to deposit to wrap using the `-send` flag

Reviewer 2: It's reading weird to me
```suggestion
- The amount of `ugnot` we want to send to be wrapped, using the `-send` flag
```

Apart from this, we have also specified the Portal Loop chain ID, `portal-loop`,

> as well as the Portal Loop remote address, `https://rpc.gno.land:443`.

Reviewer: Please consider completely switching this tutorial to use the portal loop, and not have a random gnodev cameo

Author: I've removed gnodev from this and replaced it with publishing the package to the Portal LoopL: [d6fa301](https://github.com/gnolang/gno/pull/2226/commits/d6fa3010c965703db2ea085ac71e769681a95b94) & [f805189](https://github.com/gnolang/gno/pull/2226/commits/f80518980fb464e7bb0d0f3416eb6459a3d9d87b)

> To check if we actually have the `wugnot` amount that we wanted to receive, we

Reviewer 2: Just to make it clear that the above transaction needs to be broadcast first
```suggestion
After broadcasting the transaction, we can verify that we have the amount of `wugnot` we expect. We
```

### `Send`

We can use the `Send` message type to access the TM2 [Banker](../concepts/stdlibs/banker.md)
directly and transfer coins from one Gno address to another.

Coins, such as GNOTs, are always formatted in the following way:

```
<amount><denom>
100ugnot
```

For this example, let's transfer some GNOTs. Just like before, we can configure
our `maketx send` subcommand:
```bash
gnokey maketx send \
-to g1jg8mtutu9khhfwc4nxmuhcpftf0pajdhfvsqf5 \
-send 100ugnot \
-gas-fee 10000000ugnot \
-gas-wanted 2000000 \
-broadcast \
-chainid portal-loop \
-remote "https://rpc.gno.land:443" \
mykey
```

Here, we have set the `-to` & `-send` flags to match the recipient, in this case
the publicly-known `test1` address, and `100ugnot` for the coins we want to send,
respectively.

To check the balance of a specific address, check out the `bank/balances` query
in the [ABCI queries section](#bankbalances).

### `Run`

With the `Run` message, you can write a snippet of Gno code and run it against
code on the chain. For this example, we will use the [Userbook realm](https://gno.land/r/demo/userbook),
which simply allows you to register the fact that you have interacted with it.

> It contains a simple `SignUp()` function, which we will call with `Run`.

Reviewer: Please see my earlier comment about building out the Realm for this tutorial

Author: https://github.com/gnolang/gno/pull/2226#discussion_r1733341235

To understand how to use the `Run` message better, let's write a simple `script.gno`
file. First, create a folder which will store our script.

```bash
└── example/
```

Then, let's create a `script.gno` file:

```bash
cd example
touch script.gno
```

Now, we should have the following folder structure:

```bash
└── example/
│   └── script.gno
```

> In the `script.gno` file, first define the package to be `main`. Then, we cam import

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the `script.gno` file, first define the package to be `main`. Then we can import
```

the Userbook realm and define a `main()` function with no return values which will

> be automatically detected and ran by `Run`. In it, we can call the `SingUp()` function.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
be automatically detected and run. In it, we can call the `SignUp()` function.
```

```go
package main

import "gno.land/r/demo/userbook"

func main() {
  println(userbook.SignUp())
}
```

Now we will be able to provide this to the `maketx run` subcommand:
```bash
gnokey maketx run \
-gas-fee 1000000ugnot \
-gas-wanted 20000000 \
-broadcast \
-chainid portal-loop \
-remote "https://rpc.gno.land:443" \
mykey ./script.gno
```

After running this command, the chain will execute the script and apply any state
changes. Additionally, by using `println`, which is only available in the `Run`
& testing context, we will be able to see the return value of the function called.

#### The power of `Run`

Specifically, the above example could have been replaced with a simple `maketx call`
call. The full potential of run comes out in three specific cases:
1. Calling realm functions multiple times in a loop
2. Calling functions with non-primitive input arguments

> 3. Calling functions with receiver objects

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Calling methods on realm objects
```

Author: See https://github.com/gnolang/gno/pull/2226#discussion_r1636061028

> Let's look at each of these cases in detail. To demonstrate, lets use the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's look at each of these cases in detail. To demonstrate, we'll make a call
```

> following example realm which we will call:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to the following example realm:
```

Author: [09b1fce](https://github.com/gnolang/gno/pull/2226/commits/09b1fce091cfbd2d145cb6335f2428f007dd6d1c)

```go
package foo

import "gno.land/p/demo/ufmt"

var (
	MainFoo *Foo
	foos    []*Foo
)

type Foo struct {
	bar string
	baz int
}

func init() {
	MainFoo = &Foo{bar: "mainBar", baz: 0}
}

func (f *Foo) String() string {
	return ufmt.Sprintf("Foo - (bar: %s) - (baz: %d)\n\n", f.bar, f.baz)
}

func NewFoo(bar string, baz int) *Foo {
	return &Foo{bar: bar, baz: baz}
}

func AddFoos(multipleFoos []*Foo) {
	foos = append(foos, multipleFoos...)
}

func Render(_ string) string {

> 	output := ""

Reviewer 2: Just to promote idiomatic go
```suggestion
	var output string
```

	for _, f := range foos {
		output += f.String()
	}

	return output
}
```

This realm is deployed to [`gno.land/r/leon/run/examples/foo`](https://gno.land/r/leon/run/examples/foo)
on the Portal Loop testnet.

1. Calling realm functions multiple times in a loop:
```go
package main

import (
  "gno.land/r/leon/run/examples/foo"
)

func main() {
  for i := 0; i < 5; i++ {
    println(foo.Render(""))
  }
}
```

2. Calling functions with non-primitive input arguments:

> Currently, `Call` only supports primitives for arguments. With `Run` these

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Currently, `Call` only supports primitives for arguments. With `Run`, these
```

> limitations are removed - we can execute a function that takes in a struct, array,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
limitations are removed; we can execute a function that takes in a struct, array,
```

or even an array of structs.

We are unable to call `AddFoos()` with the `Call` message type, while with `Run`,
we can:

```go
package main

import (
  "gno.land/r/leon/run/examples/foo"
  "strconv"
)

func main() {
  var multipleFoos []*foo.Foo

  for i := 0; i < 5; i++ {
    newFoo := foo.NewFoo(
      "bar"+strconv.Itoa(i),
      i,
    )

    multipleFoos = append(multipleFoos, newFoo)
  }

  foo.AddFoos(multipleFoos)
}

```

> 3. Calling functions with receiver objects:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Calling methods on realm objects:
```

Author: See https://github.com/gnolang/gno/pull/2226#discussion_r1636061028

```go
package main

import "gno.land/r/leon/run/examples/foo"

func main() {
	println(foo.MainFoo.String())
}
```

> Finally, we can call functions that are on top-level objects, which is not possible

Reviewer 2: Is this different than calling methods on realm objects? It seems the same to me

Author: No, it's not the same. Hopefully the example makes it clear, but the idea is that you can have a top-level exported object in a realm, which has a receiver method on it. You can call that method via `Run`, like so:

RealmA:

```go
package realmA

type MyType struct {...}

var Exported MyType = {...}

func (obj *MyType) MyFunc() {...}

func init() {...}

```
And somewhere else, for `MsgRun`:
```go
package main

import "realmA"

func main() {
 realmA.Exported.MyFun()
}

```

Reviewer 2: I think we are saying the same thing. "functions with receiver objects" just sounds weird and is not really something people say. Something like "methods on exported realm objects" would be better in my opinion.

Reviewer 2: I was thinking on this more. The phrasing as it exists now "with receiver objects" is incorrect. You can call a method on a value with a non-pointer receiver object and still change the state.  For example:
```go
package bar

type S struct {
	t *T
}

type T struct {
	counter int
}

var Obj S = S{t: new(T)}

func (s S) IncCounter() {
	s.t.counter++
}

func GetCounter() int {
	return Obj.t.counter
}
```
In this case, calling `bar.Obj.IncCounter()` will result in T's counter state being changed even though the method's receiver is not a pointer.

Author: Got it from the call today; it was the terminology. [methods](https://go.dev/tour/methods/1) vs functions. switched it out: [aa26e6a](https://github.com/gnolang/gno/pull/2226/commits/aa26e6a9db9c6b0e53141c8178f156ec3f41058f)

```json
height: 0
data: [
        {
          "FuncName": "Deposit",
          "Params": null,
          "Results": null
        },
        {
          "FuncName": "Withdraw",
          "Params": [
            {
            "Name": "amount",
            "Type": "uint64",
            "Value": ""
            }
          ],
          "Results": null
        },
        // other functions
]
```

### `vm/qfile`

With the `vm/qfile` query, we can fetch files found on a specific package path.
To specify the path we want to query, we can use the `-data` flag:

```bash
gnokey query vm/qfile -data "gno.land/r/demo/wugnot" -remote https://rpc.gno.land:443
```

The output is a string containing all exported functions for the
`wugnot` realm:

```bash
height: 0
data: gno.mod
wugnot.gno
z0_filetest.gno
```

### `vm/qeval`

`vm/qeval` allows us to evaluate a call to an exported function without using gas,
in read-only mode. For example:

```bash
gnokey query vm/qeval -remote https://rpc.gno.land:443 -data "gno.land/r/demo/wugnot
BalanceOf(\"g1jg8mtutu9khhfwc4nxmuhcpftf0pajdhfvsqf5\")" 
```

This command will return the `wugnot` balance of the above address without using gas.

> Properly escaping quotation marks, and inputting a new line for the function

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Properly escaping quotation marks and separate the package path and the realm function with a new line character
```

is currently required.

### `vm/qrender`

`vm/qrender` is an alias for executing `vm/qeval` on the `Render("")` function.

> We can use it like this:

Reviewer 2: We should have something here also specifying that the package path and path argument to the `Render` function need to be specified by a newline character

Author: This has now been replaced with the . syntax; I've replaced the text but I don't remember the exact commit, please take a look at the file and resolve this convo if it fixes your comment :)

```bash
gnokey query vm/qrender --data "gno.land/r/demo/userbook
" -remote https://rpc.gno.land:443
```

Running this command will display the current `Render()` output of the Userbook
realm, which is also displayed by default on the [realm's page](https://gno.land/r/demo/userbook):

```bash
height: 0
data: # Welcome to UserBook!

## UserBook - Page #1:

#### User #0 - g1jg8mtutu9khhfwc4nxmuhcpftf0pajdhfvsqf5 - signed up at Block #0
#### User #1 - g125em6arxsnj49vx35f0n0z34putv5ty3376fg5 - signed up at Block #0
#### User #2 - g1urt7pdmwg2m6z3rsgu4e8peppm4027fvpwkmj8 - signed up at Block #0
#### User #3 - g1uf8u5jf2m9l80g0zsfq7tufl3qufqc4393jtkl - signed up at Block #0
#### User #4 - g1lafcru2z2qelxr33gm4znqshmpur6l9sl3g2aw - signed up at Block #0
---

#### Total users: 5
#### Latest signup: User #4 at Block #0
---

You're viewing page #1
```

## Making an airgapped transaction

`gnokey` provides a way to create a transaction, sign it, and later

> broadcast it to a chain in an airgapped manner. With this approach, while it is

Reviewer 2: Maybe something like... "This approach, while more complicated, grants users full control over the creation, signing, and broadcasting of transactions."

Author: [d071774](https://github.com/gnolang/gno/pull/2226/commits/d071774ddc178e78e9d013acb0afabc63aba3d10)

more complicated, users can get full control over the creation, signing and
broadcasting process of transactions.

Here are the steps taken in this process:

> 1. Fetching account information from the chain

Reviewer 2: I think the imperative form reads better here.

The steps are:
1. Fetch account...
2. Create an...
3. Sign the..
4. Broadcast the...

Author: [844f301](https://github.com/gnolang/gno/pull/2226/commits/844f301d47eca9a077d43bf5ddc48c07177678a0)

2. Creating an unsigned transaction locally
3. Signing the transaction
4. Broadcasting the transaction

For this example, we will again use the Userbook realm on the Portal Loop testnet.

> ### Fetching account information from the chain

Reviewer 2: Continuous tense sounds good for the headers though

First, we need to fetch data for the account we are using to sign the transaction,
using the [auth/accounts](#authaccounts) query:

```bash
gnokey query auth/accounts/<your_address> -remote "https://rpc.gno.land:443"
```

We need to extract the account number and sequence from the output:

```bash
height: 0
data: {
  "BaseAccount": {
    "address": "g1zzqd6phlfx0a809vhmykg5c6m44ap9756s7cjj",
    "coins": "10000000ugnot",
    "public_key": null,
    "account_number": "468",
    "sequence": "0"
  }
}
```

In this case, the account number is `468`, and the sequence (nonce) is `0`. We
will need these values to sign the transaction later.

### Creating an unsigned transaction locally

To create the transaction you want, you can use the aforementioned `call` API,

> without the `-broadcast` flag, while piping the output to a local file:

Reviewer 2: Piping would be using `|`
```suggestion
without the `-broadcast` flag, while redirecting the output to a local file:
```

```bash
gnokey maketx call \
-pkgpath "gno.land/r/demo/userbook" \
-func "SignUp" \
-gas-fee 1000000ugnot \
-gas-wanted 2000000 \
mykey > userbook.tx
```

> This will create a `userbook.tx` file, with the `signature` field null.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This will create a `userbook.tx` file with a null `signature` field.
```

- `-tx-path` - path to the transaction file to sign, in our case, `userbook.tx`
- `-chainid` - id of the chain to sign for
- `-account-number` - number of the account fetched previously
- `-account-sequence` - sequence of the account fetched previously

```bash
gnokey sign \
-tx-path userbook.tx \
-chainid "portal-loop" \
-account-number 468 \
-account-sequence 0 \
mykey
```

After inputting the correct values, `gnokey` will ask for the password to decrypt
the keypair. Once we input the password, we should receive the message that the
signing was completed. If we open the `userbook.tx` file, we will be able to see
that the signature field has been populated.

We are now ready to broadcast this transaction to the chain.

### Broadcasting the transaction

To broadcast the signed transaction to the chain, we can use the `gnokey broadcast`
subcommand, giving it the path to the signed transaction:

```bash
gnokey broadcast -remote "https://rpc.gno.land:443" userbook.tx
```

In this case, we do not need to specify a keypair, as the transaction has already
been signed in a previous step and `gnokey` is only sending it to the RPC endpoint.

> ## Verifying signature in a transaction

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Verifying a transaction's signature
```

> To verify a transaction signature is correct, you can use the `gnokey verify`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To verify a transaction's signature is correct, you can use the `gnokey verify`
```
